[MUSIC]
Up to now we've been making strings
using the plus sign to just concatenate
the parts of the string
we wanted to create.
And we've used the str function to
convert numbers into strings so
that we can concatenate them, too.
This works, but it's not ideal,
especially when the operations you want to
do with the string or on the tricky side.
There's a better way to do
this using the format method.
Let's see a couple of examples.
In this example, we have two variables,
name and number.
We generate a string that has those
variables in it by using the curly
brackets placeholder to show where
the variables should be written.
We then pass the variables as
a parameter to the format method.
See how it doesn't matter that name
is a string and number is an integer?
The format method deals with that,
so we don't have to.
Pretty neat, right?
The curly brackets aren't always empty.
By using certain expressions
inside those brackets,
we can take advantage of the full
power of the format expression.
Heads up, this can get complex fast.
If at any point, you get confused, don't
panic, you only really need to understand
the basic usage of the format
method we just saw.
One of the things we can put inside
the curly brackets is the name of
the variable we want in that position
to make the whole string more readable.
This is particularly relevant when the
text can get rewritten or translated and
the variables might switch places.
In our earlier example,
we could rewrite the message to make
the variables appear in a different order.
In that case,
we'd need to pass the parameters to
format in a slightly different way.
Because we're using placeholders with
variable names, the order in which
the variables are passed to
the format function doesn't matter.
But for this to work, we need to set
the names we're going to use and
assign a value to them inside
the parameters to format.
And that's just the tip of the iceberg of
what we can do with the format method.
Want to dive a little deeper?
Great, let's keep on going.
We're going to check out
a different example.
Let's say you want to output the price
of an item with and without tax.
Depending on what the tax rate is,
the number might be a long
number with a bunch of decimals.
So if something costs $7.5 without tax and
the tax rate is 9%,
the price with tax would be $8.175.
First off, ouch, and also, since there's
no such thing as half a penny anymore,
that number doesn't make sense.
So to fix this we can make the format
function print only two decimals,
like this.
In this case between the curly brackets
we're writing a formatting expression.
There are a bunch of different
expressions we can write.
These expressions are needed when we want
to tell Python to format our values in
a way that's different from the default.
The expression starts with a colon to
separate it from the field name that we
saw before.
After the colon, we write .2f.
This means we're going to
format a float number and
that there should be two
digits after the decimal dot.
So no matter what the price is,
our function always prints two decimals.
Remember when we did the table to convert
from Fahrenheit to Celsius temperatures?
Our table looked kind of ugly because it
was full of float numbers that had way too
many decimal digits.
Using the format function,
we can make it look a lot nicer.
In these two expressions we're using
the greater than operator to align text to
the right so
that the output is neatly aligned.
In the first expression we're saying
we want the numbers to be aligned to
the right for a total of three spaces.
In the second expression we're saying we
want the number to always have exactly two
decimal places and we want to align
it to the right at six spaces.
We can use string formatting like this to
make the output of our program look nice
and also to generate useful logging and
debugging messages.
Over the course of my sysadmin career,
I've grown used to formatting strings to
create more informative error messages.
They help me understand what's going
on with a script that's failing.
There's a ton more formatting options
you can use when you need them.
But don't worry about
learning them all at once,
we'll explain any others as they come
along and we'll put everything in a cheat
sheet that you can refer to whenever
you need a formatting expression.
Let's take a look at that now and
then we'll have a quiz to help you get
more familiar with all this new knowledge.